\documentclass[9pt,twocolumn,twoside]{../../styles/osajnl}
\usepackage{fancyvrb}
\journal{i524} 

\title{ Analysis of Pentaho}


\author[1,*]{Bhavesh Reddy Merugureddy}

\affil[1]{School of Informatics and Computing, Bloomington, IN 47408, U.S.A.}


\affil[*]{Corresponding authors: bmerugur@umail.iu.edu}

\dates{Paper 1, \today}

\ociscodes{Pentaho, Data Integration, Big Data, Community, ETL, MapReduce, SQL, Hadoop, OLAP}

% replace this with your url in github/gitlab
\doi{\url{https://github.com/cloudmesh/sp17-i524/blob/master/paper1/S17-IR-2018/report.pdf}}


\begin{abstract}
Pentaho is a business analytics and data integration tool that
provides a qualified open source-based platform to assist a variety of
big data deployments. It enables different organizations to utilize
their data which helps them in delivering their services efficiently
with minimum risk and it can also be used for embedded analytics. \newline
\end{abstract}

\setboolean{displaycopyright}{true}

\begin{document}

\maketitle

\section{Introduction}

Pentaho is a business intelligence suite that provides data mining,
reporting, dashboarding and data integration capabilities. Generally,
organizations tend to obtain meaningful relationships and useful
information from the data present with them but data inconsistency and
handling large amount of data are the factors that obstruct them from
doing so. Pentaho addresses these obstacles
\cite{pentaho_wikipedia}. The platform includes a wide range of tools
that analyze, explore, visualize and predict data. It simplifies data
blending, which is the process of combining data from multiple sources
into a functioning dataset. Being an open and extensible source,
Pentaho provides big data tools to extract, prepare and blend any
data.

\section{Pentaho community}

Pentaho provides two different editions, Community edition and
Enterprise edition. As the name suggests, the Enterprise edition
provides more packages to provide additional support. The Community
edition enables the developers or users to create complex solutions
for the problems pertaining to their business
\cite{pentaho-community}. The Pentaho Community has a group of people
and helps the users in becoming a part of them and benefitting from
the open source contributions. The Community includes all users like
developers, testers and managers. Generally, the Community edition
platform enables the developers to sketch their design and develop a
rough version of their product after which they can upgrade to
Enterprise edition for final production. This shows the flexibility
that the Community edition provides to innovate, find and experiment
with the solution that the developers liked.

\section{Architecture}

Pentaho architecture can be considered as a set of four components
which are presentation layer, business intelligence platform, data and
application integration and third party applications. Data can be
provided to the presentation layer by reporting, analysis or process
management. This data can then be accessed through a web service,
portal or a browser \cite{pentaho-architecture}. The security and
repository issues are dealt by the business intelligence
platform. Data integration and third party applications are
respectively, the integration layer and applications with database
from various sources.

The architecture includes data layer, server layer and client
layer. Data layer allows an application to connect to a data
source. Server layer serves as a middle layer and several applications
run on the server. Dashboards are provided to the end users by
deploying them on the server along with the required reports. As
mentioned above, a user console is provided that is used for security
and configuration purposes. Client layer is of two forms, thin client
and thick client. Thin client generally runs on a server. Analyzer and
dashboard editor can be considered as the examples. Report designer
and data integration come under thick client which act as a
standalone.

\section{Plugins and applications}

Pentaho provides an interactive console to its users. With a few
clicks of the mouse, users are allowed to interact with new data
models and data. The platform hides the database connections and
underlying application server and provides access to various data
sources \cite{pentaho-enterprise}. It provides metadata management
capabilities and a dashboard to allow the administrators set security
levels, monitor servers and set user access. There are many server
plugins and desktop applications provided by Pentaho.

\subsection{Server applications}

Business Intelligence platform is a basic Pentaho service that
provides reports, displays dashboards, reports business rules and
performs OLAP analysis. It generally runs in Apache Java application
server and can be embedded in any other Java application server
\cite{pentaho_wikipedia}. Pentaho analysis service is another Pentaho
server application that is written in Java which primarily focuses on
online analytical processing. It aggregates data into a memory cache
by performing read operation from data sources like SQL. It comes with
the Pentaho platform in both the editions. These are some of the
server applications provided by Pentaho.

\subsection{Desktop applications}

Pentaho data mining is a desktop application that searches for
patterns in data by performing knowledge analysis. Common data mining
techniques such as classification, clustering, regression and
visualization are employed by this application along with some machine
learning algorithms. This helps the users in predicting the trends in
future. Pentaho metadata editor is an application that is used as an
abstraction layer from the underlying data sources and helps the users
in creating business models which can be used by other applications in
generating reports for the analytics. There are many more useful
desktop applications like Pentaho report designer, design studio and
aggregate designer.
 
\subsection{Server plugins}

Pentaho provides certain core services in the form of server
plugins. Some of the important server plugins are community data
access and data browser. Community data access is a Pentaho server
plugin that provides a common layer on the business analytics server
for an easy data access. It runs the server by providing a REST
interface and gets back the results in various forms such as xml, csv
or json. Community data browser is a plugin that helps R in performing
analytics on the data. It does the job of supplying queries to R by
using online analytical processing browser.

\section{Data Integration}

Extract, transform and load (ETL) are the basic operations that act as
a tool for transforming data from one database and placing in other
database. These processes can be carried out in Pentaho with the help
of a component called Pentaho Data Integration, which is also referred
as kettle \cite{pentaho-kettle}. The most useful functions of Pentaho
Data Integration include massive load of data into databases, data
cleansing, migrating data between applications and integrating several
applications. It is metadata oriented and can be used as a standalone
application. Various input and output formats such as datasheets and
text files are supported by Pentaho Data Integration.

The transformation process undergoes three steps, input step,
transformation step and output step. In the input step, data is
imported \cite{pentaho-dataIntegration}. The data is then processed
within Pentaho Data Integration and the transformed data is given out
in the output step. All these steps are carried out in parallel. The
throughput of transformation process is restricted to speed of the
step which is slowest. The slowest step is often referred as
bottleneck. To improve the performance of transformation process, two
steps are run in a loop which are, identification of the bottleneck
and continued improvement of bottleneck until it is no longer a
bottleneck. Bottlenecks are eliminated by data conversion logic and
character code-page conversion. For encoding a set of characters, a
character set is used along with a set of control characters. Code
page is a table of values that describes this character set.

Pentaho Data Integration has a set of components that contribute to
its functionalities. They are ‘Spoon’, ‘Kitchen’, ‘Pan’ and ‘Carte’
\cite{pentaho-dataTransformation}. Spoon can be considered as a
desktop application that creates simple and even complex extract,
transform and load (ETL) jobs without making the users write or read
code. It is used for transformations and jobs with the help of editor
and it is the one that is used in most of the cases such as editing,
debugging or running a transformation or a job. As the transformations
are created in Spoon, they can be executed with the help of a
standalone command line process called Pan. It is an engine that reads
data, manipulates it and loads into various data sources. Kitchen is
another standalone command line process that for executing jobs. It
schedules different jobs to run at regular intervals. Carte provides
remote execution capabilities and a medium for setting up a remote ETL
server.

\section{Big Data Use cases}

Cyber security analysis helps the end users such as data scientists
and security analysts in quickly detecting the threats. Cyber security
analytics allows the users to utilize most of the staff resources via
automation \cite{pentaho-usecase}. It enables the data scientists to
perform predictive analytics with the help of machine learning
tools. It also provides the automation of blending and reporting on a
variety of data. Pentaho platform can be utilized for data processing,
data ingestion and delivery of threat calls with minimal costs and
complexity.

Pentaho optimizes data warehouse and speeds up the development and
deployment processes. It employs a simplified process for offloading
to Hadoop. The offloaded data is usually less frequent data. Hand
coding in MapReduce jobs and SQL can be avoided by the usage of visual
integration tools. It provides access to data sources ranging from
relational to operational to NoSQL technologies. Pentaho MapReduce
helps in achieving high performance in a cluster environment. It
provides a graphical and intuitive big data integration.

Another use case identified by Pentaho is the streamlined data
refinery. Pentaho data integration processes and refines different
data sets by using Hadoop as its data processing platform. It provides
modelled, delivered and published data sets to the users for visual
analytics just by a mouse click. It can be seen as an integration
process that blends huge volumes of highly diversified data. It also
supplies tools for in-cluster simplified data processing and is
regarded as a highly practical approach.

Pentaho’s big data support extends the 360-degree view to internal and
external customer related data. Customer service teams are provided
with time-sensitive and blended streams of data. The presence of an
adaptive big data layer relieves several organizations from evolving
technologies. Customers are given access to customizable and
interactive dashboards. Data scientists are provided with predictive
analytics and data mining tools.

\section{Comparison}

Pentaho products compete with that of popular IT corporations like
SAP, IBM and Oracle. Pentaho provides open source solutions and is
considered to be much cheaper than the proprietary
equivalents. Jaspersoft is an established open source rival of
Pentaho. Though both Pentaho and Jaspersoft offer similar features
with similar costs, Pentaho has got wider online presence and more
followers in social media \cite{pentaho-comparison}.

\section{Licensing}

Pentaho Community edition is a free open source product licensed under
the General Public License version 2.0 and Mozilla Public License
1.1. The Enterprise edition is available to the users on a commercial
license. It needs to be purchased under a subscription model which
includes services and support \cite{pentaho_wikipedia}.

\section{Conclusion}

Pentaho is an open source based platform for diverse big data
deployments. It enables analytics in any environment by delivering
data with availability, usability, integrity and security. It provides
unified data integration and analytics components which are
embeddable. The server plugins and desktop applications provided by
Pentaho play a major role in enabling data analytics. Pentaho Data
Integration is the Pentaho component responsible for data
transformation and loading the data. It helps organizations in
harnessing the value from their data in order to make their operations
efficient and consistent.



\bibliography{references}
 

\newpage

\appendix


\end{document}
